New maintainer guide (#4472)
jenkinsci/jenkins: docs/MAINTAINERS.adoc

= Documentation for core maintainers

> Jenkins core is a central component of the project which serves millions of users, and ot is critical to maintain the it in a good shape.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jenkins core is a central component of the project which serves millions of users, and it is critical to maintain the it in a good shape.
```

> Jenkins core is a central component of the project which serves millions of users, and ot is critical to maintain the it in a good shape.

Reviewer 2: "maintain the it"?

I don't know what the sentence should be, so no suggestion from me.

We want to ensure quality of the integrated changes and continuity of the project,
and hence the Jenkins core pull request review and merge process is more sophisticated than for the majority of plugins.

== Scope of the document

This document applies to the following components:

* Jenkins core
* Jenkins modules
* Libraries included into the Jenkins core

> * Core components like Winstone, Extras Executable WAR, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Core components like Winstone, Executable WAR, etc.
```

That's just a GitHub repo naming convention.

Jenkins Remoting library is not in the scope for this document,
because it is handled as a sub-project with independent maintainer team.
Remoting updates in the core are subject to the process though.

== Team

=== Communication channels

* link:https://groups.google.com/d/forum/jenkinsci-dev[Jenkins Developer Mailing List]
* Chat: N/A, to be created

> * Office hours: N/A, to be created

Reviewer 2: No need to mention this or chat.

Author: I would prefer to do it so that we add contacts in the nearest future

Reviewer: It can be added when they are created?

Author: ```suggestion
* Office hours: N/A, to be created
```

Author: ```suggestion
```

=== Maintainer roles

* Committer / reviewer
* Core Pull Request Reviewer
* Core Maintainer
* Release Team Member

**Committers** and **reviewers** are common contributors who submit their changes and who review changes/issues submitted by others.
There is no special preconditions to do so, anyone is welcome to contribute.

**Core Pull Request Reviewers** is the next step for contributors who are interested to review Jenkins pull requests on a regular basis.

> They get [Triage permissions](TODO) so that they can manage pull requests, request reviews and prepare changelog drafts in the pull request description.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps this would make sense what exactly triage permissions is
```suggestion
They get [Triage permissions](https://help.github.com/en/github/setting-up-and-managing-organizations-and-teams/repository-permission-levels-for-an-organization) so that they can manage pull requests, request reviews and prepare changelog drafts in the pull request description.
```

> GitHub team: link:TODO[@jenkinsci/core-pr-reviewers].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GitHub team: link:https://github.com/orgs/jenkinsci/teams/core-pr-reviewers[@jenkinsci/core-pr-reviewers].
```

> <!--TODO: consider switching to Admin-->

Reviewer 2: 👎

Author: ```suggestion
```

Agreed

**Core Maintainers** get `Write` permissions in the repository, and hence they are able to merge pull requests.
Their responsibility is to perform reviews on a regular basis and to merge ready pull requests towards the weekly releases (`master` branch).
They are also responsible to monitor the weekly release status and to perform triage of critical issues.
GitHub team: link:TODO[@jenkinsci/core].

**Release Team Members** are responsible for Jenkins weekly and LTS releases.
Led by the link:TODO[Jenkins Release Officer], they initiate releases, prepare changelogs and backport changes into the link:TODO[Stable branch].
Team members get `Admin` permissions in the Jenkins core repository, and they also get permissions to trigger release Pipelines.

=== Ladder

> * Anyone can participate as a **committer** or as a **reviewer**.

Reviewer 2: Except that the initial reviewers team suggestion required them to have experience with core? Doesn't seem to add up. Is this deliberate? Do we want to maintain a team with people who've never been active in this repo?

Reviewer 2: Right, got confused by the naming of this vs. the next one.

Author: i will just replace the first role by "contributor", should help

  There is no precondition except having a GitHub account, just submit pull requests or comment in existing ones!
* **Core Pull Request Reviewers** can be nominated by contributors in the link:https://groups.google.com/d/forum/jenkinsci-dev[developer mailing list]. 
Self-nomination are fine.
Decision is made by a consensus in the mailing list or via voting at the link:https://jenkins.io/project/governance-meeting/[governance meeting].
* **Core Maintainers** - same process as for Core PR reviewers.
  All nominees must also sign an link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/infra-cla/[Individual Contributor License Agreement] before getting the permission in GitHub repositories.
* **Release Team Members** are assigned by the Jenkins Release officer

== Pull request review process

Jenkins core is a mission-critical part of the ecosystem.
We need to ensure that submitted pull requests are not only code complete,
but also that they do not introduce undesired defects, breaking changes and technical debt.
At the same time, we are interested to make the review process as simple as possible for contributors and maintainers.

> === Code review goals

Reviewer 2: This is missing that reviewers are expected to look at changes critically from a "product management" point of view. It's not _just_ about the code, but also whether the change makes sense in a global / holistic way, considering existing popular plugins and the way users experience Jenkins overall.

Reviewer 2: Also: Make it explicit that it is OK to reject changes for pretty much any reason based in the change itself, or request that they (especially in the case of complex changes) go through the JEP process first. Following these guidelines, we require consensus but do not "allow" reviewers to object to a PR for any non-technical reason.

Author: I mostly addressed it, except the `Following these guidelines, we require consensus but do not "allow" reviewers to object to a PR for any non-technical reason.` phrase

Reviewer 2: To clarify, that wasn't prescriptive, but rather describing a problem I saw with the guidelines. The new/updated section captures my goal very nicely.

> * Ensure that the pull request is feasible.

Reviewer 2: Don't unnecessarily write Powerpoint slides in text documents. This isn't for consumption by managers, we can handle actual paragraphs longer than one sentence.

** Not every change needs to be merged into the core, many features would be rather introduced as plugins.
   Separate release cycles for plugins also help to deliver changes faster.
** We want to extend the Jenkins core and incorporate widely used functionality there,
   but we try to keep the core as minimal as possible in terms of dependencies.
* Ensure that there is a consensus about the suggested change.
** Not all changes are discussed before they submitted as pull requests.
   Developer mailing lists, Jira issues and JEPs are used for discussions,
   but sometimes the changes go straight to the pull requests.
   And we are fine with that, especially for small patches.
** Pull requests often become a venue to discuss feasibility, underlying technical decisions and design.
   We are fine with that as well
** If there is no consensus about the feasibility and implementation,
   code reviewers are expected to suggest proper channels to maintainers
* Ensure that the pull request matches the code quality practices: test automation, Javadoc for newly introduced APIs, etc.

> ** There is no goal to make the code perfect tho

Reviewer 2: API additions for use in plugins need to be carefully considered, however. When in doubt, `@Beta` or `@NoExternalUse` to make them effectively not _real_ API additions.

* Ensure that the pull requests contain user-friendly changelogs and, if needed, upgrade guidelines
* Last but not least,
  guide newcomer contributors who are not familiar with the project processes.

> === Code review non-goals

Reviewer 2: It might not be clear what this means, so please explain.

> * Enforce a particular coding style

Reviewer 2: Honestly, if you touch it and introduce a weird coding style, you should be called out for it.

Author: Clarified it

** Jenkins core has a complex codebase created by many contributors,
   and different files have different designs

> ** Main goal is 

Reviewer 2: Unfinished sentence.

> * Make contributors to fix unrelated issues

Reviewer 2: Needs clarification what this is about. Also tie back to keeping PRs focused.

> ** Create follow-up issues instead, it is fine to referene them in comments so that the contributor might want to pick them up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Create follow-up issues instead, it is fine to reference them in comments so that the contributor might want to pick them up
```

* Breakdown the commit history or squashing PRs
** Not every contributor is a Git expert, do not request changes in the commit history unless it is necessary
** Core maintainers can squash PRs during the merge.

>    If you feel this is important, use the `squash-me-please` label

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   If you feel this is important, use the `squash-merge-me` label
```

>    If you feel this is important, use the `squash-me-please` label

Reviewer 2: When would it be important though?

Needs some guideline. Something like "An indicator to use merge commits would be if the PR history cleanly separates steps in developing the complete solution, that are individually useful to retain for the future. Substantial iteration after code review feedback, or a generally 'unclean' history (e.g. commits that fix compile errors, have no useful messages, or only exist to rebuild the PR) would indicate a preference for squash-merging the PR" perhaps?

** We want to keep pull requests atomic when possible (one feature / fix - separate commit),
   but we can live without it if there is no need to backport changes to the stable baseline.

== Merge process

=== Common merge process

**Step 1: Maintainer checklist**. Merge process can be initiated once a pull request matches the requirements:

> * Pull request is compliant wuth requirements to submitters (see the link:/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md[pull request template])

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Pull request is compliant with requirements to submitters (see the link:/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md[pull request template])
```

* There are at least 2 approvals for the pull request and no outstanding requests for change

> * Conversations in the pull request are over OR it is explicit that a reviewer does not block the change

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Conversations in the pull request are over OR it is explicit that a reviewer does not block the change (often indicated by line comments attached to an approving PR review, or by using the term "nit", from "nit-picking")
```

> * Changelog entries in the PR title and/or `Proposed changelog entries` are correct

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Changelog entries in the PR title and/or `Proposed changelog entries` are correct and reflect the current, final state of the PR
```

> * Proper changelog labels are set so that the changelog can be generated automatically

Reviewer 2: Which labels are changelog-relevant?

Reviewer: this should be set on the label description imo.

Reviewer 2: We need labels for labels!

Author: I will just reference https://github.com/jenkinsci/.github/blob/master/.github/release-drafter.yml for now to K.I.S.S

Reviewer 2: Oooooh that a nice solution 👍 @oleg-nenashev

> * If the change needs additional upgrade steps from users, `upgrade-guide-needed` label is set

Reviewer 2: I don't think this correctly describes what it takes to get an upgrade guide entry.

How about:

```suggestion
* If the change needs administrators to be aware of it when upgrading, the `upgrade-guide-needed` label is present. This is usually the case when a data migration occurs, a feature has been removed, a significant behavior change is introduced (including when there is a way to opt out), or in general when we expect at least a large minority of admins to benefit from knowing about the change, e.g. to apply a new option.
```

  and there is a `Proposed upgrade guidelines` section in the PR title.
  (link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/pull/4387[example])

> * It would make sense to backport the change to LTS, a Jira issue should exist and be labeled as `lts-candidate`

Reviewer 3: Same as above

Reviewer 3: @oleg-nenashev this should be as above stating that a jira should exist for backporting changes
```suggestion
* If it would make sense to backport the change to LTS, a Jira issue must exist, be a _Bug_ or _Improvement_, and be labeled as `lts-candidate` to be considered (see [query](https://issues.jenkins-ci.org/issues/?filter=12146)).
```

**Step 2: Marking for merge**. Once the checklist is passed,
a Core PR Reviewer or a Maintainer can mark the pull request for merge.

* `ready-for-merge` label is set
* An explicit comment is added to the pull request so that other repository watchers are notified.

>   Example: `Thanks to all contributors! We consider this change as read to be merged towards the next weekly release. It may be merged after a 24hours if there is no negative feedback`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Example: `Thanks to all contributors! We consider this change as ready to be merged towards the next weekly release. It may be merged after 24hours if there is no negative feedback`
```

**Step 3: Merge!**.
A Core Maintainer merges the change after a timeout (if needed).
After that the change will be landed in the next weekly release unless it gets reverted later.
LTS Backporting, if needed, will be handled separately by the release team.

=== Exceptions

* Jenkins Security Team uses a different process for security issue fixes.
  They are reviewed and integrated by the Security team in private repositories.
  Security hardening and enhancements go through the standard process.
* Release Team members are permitted to bypass the review/merge process if and only if a change is needed to unblock the security release.
  Common review process is used otherwise.
* 24 hours timeout after `ready-for-merge` is not required for...
//TODO(oleg_nenashev): Define "trivial" better to avoid loopholes

> ** trivial changes like typo fixes or minor Javadoc improvements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
** changes that do not result in changes to the primary deliverables, such as minor changes to code commits, or typo fixes in local (non-parameter) variables.
```

Author: I need to think about it. there was no intention to focus on variables only, typo fixes in WebUI also qualify IMHO

Author: ```suggestion
* changes that do not result in changes to the primary functionality, such as typo fixes in documentation or code which is not exposed as public API.
```

Reviewer 2: @oleg-nenashev Disagree, that would mean any `internal` PR (e.g. big refactorings and rewrites) is fair game to merge quickly.

Author: ```suggestion
** changes that do not result in changes to the primary functionality, such as typo fixes in documentation or localization files
```

What about that @daniel-beck ? If not, will drop the bullet entirely

** changes which do not affect the production code: Jenkinsfile tweaks, tools inside the repo, etc. 

> 

Reviewer: may not need to be stated, but possibly could add:
```suggestion
** broken master build

```

Reviewer 2: Agree. Cleaning up after bad merges should be expedited to unblock all other PRs and development.

Reviewer 3: I'm on board with this given that we were bitten by this exact scenario recently in #4467

=== Squashing pull requests OR not?

> Right now we do not have a strict policy about it.

Reviewer 2: Would reference my suggestion from above.

== Tools

* link:TODO[Core Pull Request Tester]
* link:TODO[Core Changelog Generator]
* link:/update-since-todo.sh[Javadoc @since version updater]

== Feedback

> The process documented in this document is not slate in stone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process documented in this document is not set in stone.
```

= Documentation for core maintainers

Jenkins core is a central component of the project which serves millions of users, and it is critical to maintain the it in a good shape.
We want to ensure quality of the integrated changes and continuity of the project,
and hence the Jenkins core pull request review and merge process is more sophisticated than for the majority of plugins.

== Scope of the document

This document applies to the following components:

* Jenkins core
* Jenkins modules
* Libraries included into the Jenkins core
* Core components like Winstone, Executable WAR, etc.

Jenkins Remoting library is not in the scope for this document,
because it is handled as a sub-project with independent maintainer team.
Remoting updates in the core are subject to the process though.

== Team

=== Communication channels

* link:https://groups.google.com/d/forum/jenkinsci-dev[Jenkins Developer Mailing List]
* Chat: N/A, to be created
* Office hours: N/A, to be created

=== Maintainer roles

* Committer / reviewer

> * Core Pull Request Reviewer

Reviewer 4: I think part of the trouble I'm having with suggesting better naming is that I'm not yet entirely clear on the different roles. The level 1 role (basic GH user) and the level 4 role (release manager) are pretty clear. I'm not finding the level 2 and 3 roles as clear so it's harder to suggest meaningfully distinctive names.

<!--TODO: consider switching to Admin-->
**Core Maintainers** get `Write` permissions in the repository, and hence they are able to merge pull requests.
Their responsibility is to perform reviews on a regular basis and to merge ready pull requests towards the weekly releases (`master` branch).
They are also responsible to monitor the weekly release status and to perform triage of critical issues.
GitHub team: link:TODO[@jenkinsci/core].

**Release Team Members** are responsible for Jenkins weekly and LTS releases.
Led by the link:TODO[Jenkins Release Officer], they initiate releases, prepare changelogs and backport changes into the link:TODO[Stable branch].
Team members get `Admin` permissions in the Jenkins core repository, and they also get permissions to trigger release Pipelines.

=== Ladder

* Anyone can participate as a **committer** or as a **reviewer**.
  There is no precondition except having a GitHub account, just submit pull requests or comment in existing ones!
* **Core Pull Request Reviewers** can be nominated by contributors in the link:https://groups.google.com/d/forum/jenkinsci-dev[developer mailing list]. 

> Self-nomination are fine.

Reviewer 5: No native speaker, but it sounds odd to me
```suggestion
Self-nomination is fine.
```

   but sometimes the changes go straight to the pull requests.
   And we are fine with that, especially for small patches.
** Pull requests often become a venue to discuss feasibility, underlying technical decisions and design.
   We are fine with that as well
** If there is no consensus about the feasibility and implementation,
   code reviewers are expected to suggest proper channels to maintainers
* Ensure that the pull request matches the code quality practices: test automation, Javadoc for newly introduced APIs, etc.
** There is no goal to make the code perfect tho
* Ensure that the pull requests contain user-friendly changelogs and, if needed, upgrade guidelines
* Last but not least,
  guide newcomer contributors who are not familiar with the project processes.

=== Code review non-goals

* Enforce a particular coding style
** Jenkins core has a complex codebase created by many contributors,
   and different files have different designs
** Main goal is 
* Make contributors to fix unrelated issues
** Create follow-up issues instead, it is fine to reference them in comments so that the contributor might want to pick them up

> * Breakdown the commit history or squashing PRs

Reviewer 5: Agree with Jeff

> * Breakdown the commit history or squashing PRs

Reviewer 2: Needs clarification.

> * Breakdown the commit history or squashing PRs

Author: ```suggestion
* Make contributors to have atomic commit history or to squash their pull request
```

  and there is a `Proposed upgrade guidelines` section in the PR title.
  (link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/pull/4387[example])
* It would make sense to backport the change to LTS, a Jira issue should exist and be labeled as `lts-candidate`

**Step 2: Marking for merge**. Once the checklist is passed,
a Core PR Reviewer or a Maintainer can mark the pull request for merge.

* `ready-for-merge` label is set
* An explicit comment is added to the pull request so that other repository watchers are notified.
  Example: `Thanks to all contributors! We consider this change as ready to be merged towards the next weekly release. It may be merged after 24hours if there is no negative feedback`

**Step 3: Merge!**.
A Core Maintainer merges the change after a timeout (if needed).

> After that the change will be landed in the next weekly release unless it gets reverted later.

Author: ```suggestion
After that the change will be landed in the next weekly release.
```

:toc:
:toclevels: 3

= Documentation for core maintainers

toc::[]

Jenkins core is a central component of the project which serves millions of users, and it is critical to maintain it in a good shape.
We want to ensure quality of the integrated changes and continuity of the project,
and hence the Jenkins core pull request review and merge process is more sophisticated than for the majority of plugins.

== Scope of the document

This document applies to the following components:

* Jenkins core
* Jenkins modules
* Libraries included into the Jenkins core
* Core components like Winstone, Executable WAR, etc.

Jenkins Remoting library is not in the scope for this document,
because it is handled as a sub-project with independent maintainer team.
Remoting updates in the core are subject to the process though.

== Team

=== Communication channels

* link:https://groups.google.com/d/forum/jenkinsci-dev[Jenkins Developer Mailing List]
* Chat: N/A, to be created
* Office hours: N/A, to be created

=== Roles

* Contributor
* Core Pull Request Reviewer
* Core Maintainer
* Release Team Member

**Contributors** submit pull requests to the Jenkins core and review changes submitted by others.

> They can also review and triage incoming issues in Jenkins Jira.

Author: I will add Jira separately once the triage process is established

```suggestion
```

There is no special preconditions to do so, anyone is welcome to contribute.

**Core Pull Request Reviewers** is the next step for contributors who are interested to review Jenkins pull requests on a regular basis.

> They get [Triage permissions](https://help.github.com/en/github/setting-up-and-managing-organizations-and-teams/repository-permission-levels-for-an-organization) so that they can manage pull requests, request reviews and prepare changelog drafts in the pull request description.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They get https://help.github.com/en/github/setting-up-and-managing-organizations-and-teams/repository-permission-levels-for-an-organization[Triage permissions] so that they can manage pull requests, request reviews and prepare changelog drafts in the pull request description.
```

Their main responsibility is to triage and review the incoming pull requests,
and to guide newcomer contributors who are not familiar with the project's processes.
GitHub team: link:https://github.com/orgs/jenkinsci/teams/core-pr-reviewers[@jenkinsci/core-pr-reviewers].

**Core Maintainers** get `Write` permissions in the repository, and hence they are able to merge pull requests.
Their responsibility is to perform pull request reviews on a regular basis and to merge ready pull requests towards the weekly releases (`master` branch).
They are also responsible to monitor the weekly release status and to perform triage of critical issues.
GitHub team: link:https://github.com/orgs/jenkinsci/teams/core[@jenkinsci/core].

> **Release Team Members** are responsible for Jenkins weekly and LTS releases.

Reviewer 2: Would comment this section out while it's still pretty much a WIP.

Author: I agree that we should rater keep it

> Led by the link:https://jenkins.io/project/team-leads/#release[Jenkins Release Officer], they initiate releases, prepare changelogs and backport changes into the link:TODO[Stable branch].

Reviewer 2: Makes no sense to insert a link here when the stable branch changes every few months.

> Team members get `Admin` permissions in the Jenkins core repository, and they also get permissions to trigger release Pipelines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Team members get `Write` permissions in the Jenkins core repository, and they also get permissions to trigger release Pipelines.
```

> === Ladder

Author: I tried merging it, but such approach looks better. Roles are more important to standalone contributors

> * *Contributors*. Anyone can participate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Contributors**. Anyone can participate.
```

  There is no precondition except having a GitHub account, just submit pull requests or comment in existing ones!
* **Core Pull Request Reviewers** can be nominated by contributors in the link:https://groups.google.com/d/forum/jenkinsci-dev[developer mailing list]. 
Self-nomination is fine.
Decision is made by a consensus in the mailing list or via voting at the link:https://jenkins.io/project/governance-meeting/[governance meeting].
* **Core Maintainers** - same process as for Core PR reviewers.
  All nominees must also sign an link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/infra-cla/[Individual Contributor License Agreement] before getting the permission in GitHub repositories.

> * **Release Team Members** are assigned by the Jenkins Release officer

Reviewer 2: Strictly speaking, the final boss is the release officer, elected every year? 😄

Author: Yup

== Pull request review process

Jenkins core is a mission-critical part of the ecosystem.
We need to ensure that submitted pull requests are not only code complete,
but also that they do not introduce undesired defects, breaking changes and technical debt.
At the same time, we are interested to make the review process as simple as possible for contributors and maintainers.

=== Code review goals

There are the following code review goals:

> * Ensure that the pull request is feasible and that it fits the Jenkins ecosystem

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Ensure that the pull request is _feasible_ and that it fits the Jenkins ecosystem
```

> * Verify compatibility of the suggested changes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Verify _compatibility_ of the suggested changes
```

> * Ensure that the pull request matches the code quality practices: test automation, Javadoc for newly introduced APIs, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Ensure that the pull request matches the _code quality_ practices: test automation, Javadoc for newly introduced APIs, etc.
```

> * Ensure that the pull request contains appropriate changelogs and, if needed, upgrade guidelines.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't have its own section below, as the only item in this list. Deliberate?

Author: yes. Can be expanded later if needed

> * Ensure there is a consensus among reviewers about all items above 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Ensure there is a _consensus_ among reviewers about all items above.
```

**Feasibility**.
Reviewers are expected to look at changes critically from a "product management" point of view.
It's not just about the code, but also whether the change makes sense in a global / holistic way, considering existing popular plugins and the way users experience Jenkins overall.
Also, not every change needs to be merged into the core.
Many features would be better introduced as plugins which have separate release cycles and allow delivering changes faster.
We want to extend the Jenkins core and incorporate widely used functionality and extension points there,
but we try to keep the core as minimal as possible in terms of dependencies.

**Compatibility**.
The Jenkins project has a long history of backward compatibility.
We accept breaking changes when it is needed (security fixes, feature deprecation and removal, etc.),
but ultimately the project's goal is retain as much compatibility as possible.
It includes both feature compatibility and binary/API compatibility which is important for the plugin ecosystem.

> Although we provide some tools for checking API usages across open-source plugins,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although we have some tools (like https://github.com/jenkins-infra/usage-in-plugins[usage-in-plugins]) for checking API usages across open-source plugins,
```

> there is no way to confirm external usages in 3rd-party proprietary plugins which is also a part of the ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: Would not consider that relevant. It's also not actionable, what would a reader take from this?

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3000480/74657443-8c58ed00-5190-11ea-9466-bb2f5305ce29.png)

**Code quality**.

> There is no goal to make the code perfect, but we want to ensure that all new code matches basic quality standards:

Reviewer 2: Weird phrasing, perhaps

```suggestion
The code doesn't have to be perfect, but we want to ensure that all new code matches basic quality standards:
```

test coverage for newly added functionality and fixes,
documentation for newly introduced APIs,
the submitted code is readable and matches the code style in the surrounding codebase,

> etc.

Reviewer 2: Add a note that we're aware that there are existing inconsistencies in the code, and that new code should follow the (majority) style guide, while updates to existing code should only fix formatting on the lines affected anyway to keep the diff minimal, while respecting the overall formatting of the file?

Reviewer 6: I also would appreciate a recommendation to keep diff volume small.  

Minimizing diff size helps reviewers focus their attention on the specifics of the change and reduces the risk of a change from one pull request creating a conflict in another pull request.  Both are worthwhile.

**Consensus**.
Not all changes are discussed before they submitted as pull requests.
Developer mailing lists, Jira issues and JEPs are used for discussions,
but sometimes the changes go straight to the pull requests.
And we are fine with that, especially for small patches.
Pull requests often become a venue to discuss feasibility, underlying technical decisions and design.
We are fine with that as well.
If there is no consensus about the feasibility and implementation,

> code reviewers are expected to suggest proper channels to maintainers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
code reviewers are expected to suggest proper channels for contributors to discuss their contribution.
```

> * A discussion in the link:https://groups.google.com/d/forum/jenkinsci-dev[Jenkins Developer Mailing List] is a default way to go

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A discussion in the link:https://groups.google.com/d/forum/jenkinsci-dev[Jenkins Developer Mailing List] is the default way to go
```

> * If a consensus cannot be reached in the mailing list,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If no consensus can be reached on the mailing list,
```

>   voting at the link:https://jenkins.io/project/governance-meeting/[Jenkins Governance Meeting] can be used to get a final decision

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  voting at the link:https://jenkins.io/project/governance-meeting/[Jenkins Governance Meeting] can be used to get a final decision.
```

=== Code review non-goals

Code reviews do NOT pursue the following goals:

* Accepting/merging any pull request. 
  Not everything is going to be merged, and reviewers are expected to focus on the Jenkins ecosystem integrity first.
  We guide contributors and help them to get their changes integrated, but it needs cooperation on both sides.
  It is **fine** to close invalid and inactive pull requests if there is no activity by a submitter or other contributors.
* Enforcing a particular coding style.
  Jenkins core has a complex codebase created by many contributors, and different files have different designs.
  Our main goal is to firstly have the code readable by other contributors.
* Make contributors to fix unrelated issues
** Create follow-up issues instead, it is fine to reference them in comments so that the contributor might want to pick them up
* Breakdown the commit history or squashing PRs
** Not every contributor is a Git expert, do not request changes in the commit history unless it is necessary
** Core maintainers can squash PRs during the merge.

>    If you feel this is important, use the `squash-merge-me` label

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   If you feel this is important, add the `squash-merge-me` label
```

> ** We want to keep pull requests atomic when possible (one feature / fix - separate commit),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
** We want to keep pull requests focused when possible (one feature / fix per pull request),
```

Reviewer 2: What does "separate commit" mean here?

Author: Whatever. Your option is better

   but we can live without it if there is no need to backport changes to the stable baseline.

== Merge process

=== Common merge process

**Step 1: Maintainer checklist**. Merge process can be initiated once a pull request matches the requirements:

* Pull request is compliant with requirements to submitters (see the link:/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md[pull request template])
* There are at least 2 approvals for the pull request and no outstanding requests for change
* Conversations in the pull request are over OR it is explicit that a reviewer does not block the change (often indicated by line comments attached to an approving PR review, or by using the term "nit", from "nit-picking")

> * Changelog entries in the PR title and/or `Proposed changelog entries` are correct and reflect the current, final state of the PR

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Changelog entries in the PR title and/or _Proposed changelog entries_ are correct and reflect the current, final state of the PR
```

* Proper changelog labels are set so that the changelog can be generated automatically

> * If the change needs administrators to be aware of it when upgrading, the `upgrade-guide-needed` label is present. This is usually the case when a data migration occurs, a feature has been removed, a significant behavior change is introduced (including when there is a way to opt out), or in general when we expect at least a large minority of admins to benefit from knowing about the change, e.g. to apply a new option.

Reviewer 2: Line could use some reformatting after applying the suggested edit.

>   and there is a `Proposed upgrade guidelines` section in the PR title.

Reviewer 2: Broken text.

  (link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/pull/4387[example])
* It would make sense to backport the change to LTS, a Jira issue should exist and be labeled as `lts-candidate`

**Step 2: Marking for merge**. Once the checklist is passed,
a Core PR Reviewer or a Maintainer can mark the pull request for merge.

* `ready-for-merge` label is set
* An explicit comment is added to the pull request so that other repository watchers are notified.

>   Example: `Thanks to all contributors! We consider this change as ready to be merged towards the next weekly release. It may be merged after 24hours if there is no negative feedback`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Example: _Thanks to all contributors! We consider this change as ready to be merged towards the next weekly release. It may be merged after 24hours if there is no negative feedback_
```

> **Step 3: Merge!**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Step 3: Merge!**
```

A Core Maintainer merges the change after allowing sufficient time for comment (if needed).
After that the change will be landed in the next weekly release.
LTS Backporting, if needed, will be handled separately by the release team.

=== Exceptions

* Jenkins Security Team uses a different process for security issue fixes.
  They are reviewed and integrated by the Security team in private repositories.
  Security hardening and enhancements go through the standard process.
* Release Team members are permitted to bypass the review/merge process if and only if a change is needed to unblock the security release.
  Common review process is used otherwise.

> * 24 hours timeout after `ready-for-merge` is not required for...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* 24 hours waiting perioid after adding the `ready-for-merge` label is not required for:
```

**Feasibility**.
Reviewers are expected to look at changes critically from a "product management" point of view.
It's not just about the code, but also whether the change makes sense in a global / holistic way, considering existing popular plugins and the way users experience Jenkins overall.
Also, not every change needs to be merged into the core.
Many features would be better introduced as plugins which have separate release cycles and allow delivering changes faster.
We want to extend the Jenkins core and incorporate widely used functionality and extension points there,
but we try to keep the core as minimal as possible in terms of dependencies.

**Compatibility**.
The Jenkins project has a long history of backward compatibility.
We accept breaking changes when it is needed (security fixes, feature deprecation and removal, etc.),
but ultimately the project's goal is retain as much compatibility as possible.
It includes both feature compatibility and binary/API compatibility which is important for the plugin ecosystem.
Although we have some tools (like https://github.com/jenkins-infra/usage-in-plugins[usage-in-plugins]) for checking API usages across open-source plugins,

> there is no way to confirm external usages in 3rd-party proprietary plugins which is also a part of the ecosystem.

Reviewer 6: Minor phrasing suuggestion
```suggestion
there is no way to confirm external usages in 3rd-party proprietary plugins which are also a part of the ecosystem.
```

If there is no consensus about the feasibility and implementation,
code reviewers are expected to suggest proper channels for contributors to discuss their contribution.

* A discussion in the link:https://groups.google.com/d/forum/jenkinsci-dev[Jenkins Developer Mailing List] is the default way to go
* If no consensus can be reached on the mailing list,
  voting at the link:https://jenkins.io/project/governance-meeting/[Jenkins Governance Meeting] can be used to get a final decision.

=== Code review non-goals

Code reviews do NOT pursue the following goals:

* Accepting/merging any pull request. 
  Not everything is going to be merged, and reviewers are expected to focus on the Jenkins ecosystem integrity first.
  We guide contributors and help them to get their changes integrated, but it needs cooperation on both sides.
  It is **fine** to close invalid and inactive pull requests if there is no activity by a submitter or other contributors.
* Enforcing a particular coding style.
  Jenkins core has a complex codebase created by many contributors, and different files have different designs.
  Our main goal is to firstly have the code readable by other contributors.

> * Make contributors to fix unrelated issues

Reviewer 6: Minor phrasing suggestion
```suggestion
* Make contributors fix issues that are not related to the primary topic of the pull request
```

==== Step 2: Is it a good time to merge?

link:[https://jenkins.io/security/](Jenkins security updates) are coordinated with the LTS calendar, and if the weekly introduces regressions, users of that line may have to choose between security fixes, and a working Jenkins.
The Jenkins security team will usually send a "pre-announcement" to link:https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/jenkinsci-advisories[the advisories list] on Wednesday or Thursday the week before release, but that's not always doable.
For these reasons, the following changes should not be merged during the week before LTS releases (weeks 3, 7, 11, 15, etc. on the page linked above):

* Changes that could be considered risky (relatively high risk of introducing regressions), as they could make users of Jenkins weekly releases choose between getting security fixes, and having a functioning Jenkins
* Very large changes (in terms of lines changed), because the Jenkins security team needs to prepare security fixes for the weekly release line in a very short period of time.

If the change is ready but it is not a good time, consider labeling the pull request with the `on-hold` label.

> If a merge is needed, please consult with the Jenkins Security officer

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If a merge is needed, please consult with the Jenkins Security officer.
```

==== Step 3: Marking for merge

Once the checklist is passed, a Core PR Reviewer or a Maintainer can mark the pull request for merge.

* `ready-for-merge` label is set
* An explicit comment is added to the pull request so that other repository watchers are notified.
  Example: _Thanks to all contributors! We consider this change as ready to be merged towards the next weekly release. It may be merged after 24hours if there is no negative feedback_

==== Step 4: Merge!

A Core Maintainer merges the change after allowing sufficient time for comment (if needed).
After that the change will be landed in the next weekly release.
LTS Backporting, if needed, will be handled separately by the release team.

> Keep in mind that we set 

Reviewer 6: Either an incomplete sentence or the start of the next section heading `Exceptions`.  Assumed an incomplete sentence.
```suggestion
```

=== Code review non-goals

Code reviews do NOT pursue the following goals:

* Accepting/merging any pull request. 
  Not everything is going to be merged, and reviewers are expected to focus on the Jenkins ecosystem integrity first.
  We guide contributors and help them to get their changes integrated, but it needs cooperation on both sides.
  It is **fine** to close invalid and inactive pull requests if there is no activity by a submitter or other contributors.
* Enforcing a particular coding style.
  Jenkins core has a complex codebase created by many contributors, and different files have different designs.
  Our main goal is to firstly have the code readable by other contributors.
* Make contributors fix issues that are not related to the primary topic of the pull request
** Create follow-up issues instead, it is fine to reference them in comments so that the contributor might want to pick them up
* Breakdown the commit history or squashing PRs
** Not every contributor is a Git expert, do not request changes in the commit history unless it is necessary
** Core maintainers can squash PRs during the merge.

>    If you feel this is important, add the `squash-merge-me` label

Author: ```suggestion
   If you feel this is important, add the [squash-merge-me](https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/pulls?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Apr+label%3Asquash-merge-me) label
```

:toc:
:toclevels: 3

= Documentation for core maintainers

toc::[]

Jenkins core is a central component of the project which serves millions of users, and it is critical to maintain it in a good shape.
We want to ensure quality of the integrated changes and continuity of the project,
and hence the Jenkins core pull request review and merge process is more sophisticated than for the majority of plugins.

== Scope of the document

This document applies to the following components:

* Jenkins core
* Jenkins modules
* Libraries included into the Jenkins core
* Core components like Winstone, Executable WAR, etc.

Jenkins Remoting library is not in the scope for this document,
because it is handled as a sub-project with independent maintainer team.
Remoting updates in the core are subject to the process though.

== Team

=== Communication channels

* link:https://groups.google.com/d/forum/jenkinsci-dev[Jenkins Developer Mailing List]

> * Chat: N/A, to be created

Author: ```suggestion
```

Reviewers are expected to look at changes critically from a "product management" point of view.
It's not just about the code, but also whether the change makes sense in a global / holistic way, considering existing popular plugins and the way users experience Jenkins overall.
Also, not every change needs to be merged into the core.
Many features would be better introduced as plugins which have separate release cycles and allow delivering changes faster.
We want to extend the Jenkins core and incorporate widely used functionality and extension points there,
but we try to keep the core as minimal as possible in terms of dependencies.

==== Ensuring Compatibility

The Jenkins project has a long history of backward compatibility.
We accept breaking changes when it is needed (security fixes, feature deprecation and removal, etc.),
but ultimately the project's goal is retain as much compatibility as possible.
It includes both feature compatibility and binary/API compatibility which is important for the plugin ecosystem.
Although we have some tools (like https://github.com/jenkins-infra/usage-in-plugins[usage-in-plugins]) for checking API usages across open-source plugins,

> there is no way to confirm external usages in 3rd-party proprietary plugins which are also a part of the ecosystem.

Reviewer 7: I do not want to rathole on this, but do we consider 3rd-party plugin to be part of the ecosystem? To me, it would make more sense to define the boundaries of the ecosystem (pretty much https://github.com/{jenkinsci,jenkins-infra,stapler}) and that would be the place where it is possible to make certain effort to ensure compatibility, but there is not commitment elsewhere.

Author: I consider 3rd-party plugins as a part of wider Jenkins ecosystem which we would like to respect and minimize breaking changes there. Not just because I work for CloudBees, there we can easily fix breaking changes. But there are thousands of in-house plugins created by Jenkins users. I have written at least one at all my previous companies

  In Jenkins core we use the link:https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/codeconvtoc-136057.html[these Code Conventions for the Java TM Programming Language] as a default code style
* Updates to existing code should only fix formatting on the lines affected anyway to keep the diff minimal.
  It helps reviewers focus their attention on the specifics of the change and reduces the risk of a change from one pull request creating a conflict in another pull request.

==== Maintaining documentation

* Jenkins documentation is hosted on https://jenkins.io/doc/.
  When a new user-facing change is added, we should encourage contributors to update documentation in downstream pull requests.
* Same applies to Jenkins changelogs (link:https://jenkins.io/changelog[weekly], link:https://jenkins.io/changelog-stable/[stable]) and link:https://jenkins.io/doc/upgrade-guide/[upgrade guidelines]:
  We have a semi-automated process which is based on pull request summaries and labels.
  Core maintainers are expected to validate the entries as a part of the pull request review/merge process.
  See the checklist below in the _Merge process_ section.

==== Building consensus

> Not all changes are discussed before they submitted as pull requests.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Not all changes are discussed before they are submitted as pull requests.
```

We do not require contributors to spend time on cleaning it up, because core maintainers can squash PRs during the merge.
Reviewers can add a [squash-merge-me](https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/pulls?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Apr+label%3Asquash-merge-me) label during reviews to highlight that it is needed.

At the same time, we do not require any pull request to be merged as a single commit.
Multiple commits are useful in many cases.

When do we merge pull requests as is?

* There is only one commit with a reasonable commit message
* There are multiple atomic commits. Each commit has a reasonable message and can be compiled on its own
** Example:
*** **Commit 1**: `[JENKINS-1234] - Reproduce the issue in tests`
*** **Commit 2**: `[JENKINS-1234] - Fix the issue by updating Foo` 
* There are multiple commit authors who expressed the desire to keep commit history as is.
  By default we do not consider multiple authors as a blocker for squash, because GitHub now 
  link:https://help.github.com/en/github/committing-changes-to-your-project/creating-a-commit-with-multiple-authors[supports co-authors]

When do we squash commits?

> * We squash commits during when core maintainers decide to do so (`squash-merge-me` label), usually when the conditions above are not met.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* We squash commits when core maintainers decide to do so (`squash-merge-me` label), usually when the conditions above are not met.
```

  or in general when we expect at least a large minority of admins to benefit from knowing about the change, e.g. to apply a new option.
* It would make sense to backport the change to LTS, a Jira issue should exist and be labeled as `lts-candidate`

==== Step 2: Is it a good time to merge?

> link:[https://jenkins.io/security/](Jenkins security updates) are coordinated with the LTS calendar, and if the weekly introduces regressions, users of that line may have to choose between security fixes, and a working Jenkins.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
link:[https://jenkins.io/security/](Jenkins security updates) are coordinated with the LTS calendar, and if the weekly release on the weekend before an LTS release introduces regressions, users of the weekly line may have to choose between security fixes, and a working Jenkins.
```

For these reasons, the following changes should not be merged during the week before LTS releases (weeks 3, 7, 11, 15, etc. on the page linked above):

* Changes that could be considered risky (relatively high risk of introducing regressions), as they could make users of Jenkins weekly releases choose between getting security fixes, and having a functioning Jenkins
* Very large changes (in terms of lines changed), because the Jenkins security team needs to prepare security fixes for the weekly release line in a very short period of time.

> If the change is ready but it is not a good time, consider labeling the pull request with the `on-hold` label.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the change is ready but it is not a good time, consider labeling the pull request with the `on-hold` label.
Make sure to add a comment explaining why it was put on hold.
```

> If a merge is needed, please consult with the Jenkins Security officer

Reviewer 2: No such thing?

Author: Hm? Do you suggest removing it?

Reviewer 2: I'm questioning the premise of "a merge is needed".

Should have submitted your PR earlier if you need something very large to go into a specific weekly release.

Author: I will just remove it for now. There are always ways to escalate of merge is needed

==== Step 3: Marking for merge

Once the checklist is passed, a Core PR Reviewer or a Maintainer can mark the pull request for merge.

* `ready-for-merge` label is set
* An explicit comment is added to the pull request so that other repository watchers are notified.
  Example: _Thanks to all contributors! We consider this change as ready to be merged towards the next weekly release. It may be merged after 24hours if there is no negative feedback_

==== Step 4: Merge!

A Core Maintainer merges the change after allowing sufficient time for comment (if needed).
After that the change will be landed in the next weekly release.
LTS Backporting, if needed, will be handled separately by the release team.

> Keep in mind that we set 

Reviewer 2: Unfinished

Author: I was about linking the LTS section below, will fix

Right now we do not have a strict policy about it.

== LTS Process

Jenkins also offers the link:https://jenkins.io/download/lts/[LTS Release Line].
It is maintained by the Jenkins Release Team which coordinates link:https://jenkins.io/download/lts/#backporting-process[backporting] and release candidate testing.

> It mostly happens through the developer mailing list and through backporting pull requests labeled with link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/labels/into-lts[into-lts].

Reviewer 2: Ambiguous or wrong: These PRs go directly into LTS, they _are_ the backports.

Author: ```suggestion
It mostly happens through the developer mailing list. Backports are submitted as pull requests labeled with link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/labels/into-lts[into-lts].
```
